Release Notes

v.0.4, released May 9, 2011

What's new, what you should know, and what you've been asking about the latest version of Akiban.

    Release Notes
        Introduction to Akiban
        The Akiban Architecture:
        What's New in Akiban 0.4
            What is v0.4 Intended For?
            What is v0.4 NOT Intended For?
        System Requirements
        Dependencies
            Java
        Downloading and Installing
            Directory Structure
            Akiban Studio URL
        Known Issues
        Troubleshooting
            Port conflicts
            Existing Tomcat installation
            Tomcat Crashed!
        Resources

Introduction to Akiban

A new approach for relational systems to deal with the complexity of scaled-out database schemas.

Akiban's technology enables pre-computing of joins, which reduces and in many cases eliminates the high costs of these operations. That leads to transformational advances in performance and scalability, especially for complex operational queries. Akiban’s solutions can be deployed incrementally, without the disruption and risk of a full database replacement. They use only industry standard protocols and access mechanisms - including SQL - and therefore require only minimal changes to existing database applications.

Akiban’s Table-Grouping(TM) technology is a new approach for relational systems to deal with the complexity of scaled-out database schemas that the following features and benefits:

    Frictionless adoption as a MySQL slave
    Easy integration as a storage engine plugin to MySQL
    Simple access using the memcache protocol together with Akiban's Data API
    Developer-friendly output via a nested JSON string

The Akiban Architecture:

The suite is made up of the following projects:

Akiban Server:
Akiban Server is the base component of the Akiban architecture. It arranges relational data in real time into table groups, allowing for very efficient query access. It offers an operator framework for query execution against the grouped data which supports direct access as well as full transactional SQL semantics.

Akiban SQL Engine:
The SQL Engine provides rich and fast SQL access to the Akiban Server.

Akiban Adapter for MySQL:
The adapter replicates MySQL data into the Akiban Server in real time.

Akiban PersistIT:
A compact, fast Java btree for Akiban Server, with a unique hybrid update approach.

Akiban Studio:
An intuitive UI tool designed to analyze existing MySQL schemas and problem queries, design grouping, deploy and monitor Akiban Server.

Mailing List:http://groups.google.com/group/akiban-server
What's New in Akiban 0.4

The Halo release is the first major product release milestone for Akiban.  With this release we have delivered:

    A relational, ACID-compliant database that implements Table-Grouping technology to eliminate the cost of joins
    A soon-to-be open-source offering, hosted on LaunchPad
    A MySQL storage engine designed to
        accelerate problem queries
        simplify adoption by providing replication slave integration
        improve application performance simply through a memcached-based access language delivering JSON output

What is v0.4 Intended For?

Akiban Server v0.4 is intended to enable design partners and early adopters to evaluate the benefits of Table-Grouping(TM) in a MySQL replication environment.
What is v0.4 NOT Intended For?

Akiban Server v0.4 is not intended for production deployments at this time.
System Requirements
Operating System Version 	CentOS 5.4 or higher, Ubuntu 10.04
Architecture 	x64
MySQL Version 	5.5.8 (standalone or replicated slave) available here
Disk Space 	1.33 x grouped table size*

* TIP: See the MySQL documentation for OPTIMIZE TABLE for more information on how to determine table size
Dependencies
Java

The only dependency when installing Akiban server from packages is Java. Akiban recommends the Sun Java (java6 for CentOS - which must be downloaded from Oracle's website for CentOS - http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index.html, and sun-java6-jre on Ubuntu) distribution to maximize performance.

On Ubuntu, the java packages require the following lines in /etc/apt/sources.list be uncommented (note that the distribution, e.g. lucid, depends on which Ubuntu version you are running):
deb http://archive.canonical.com/ubuntu lucid partner
deb-src http://archive.canonical.com/ubuntu lucid partner

If installing from source, Maven is required.
Downloading and Installing

Downloading and Installing Akiban is simple. This page contains all of the relevant details (will be updated to reflect akiban.com URL), whereas the basic installation procedure is detailed below:
Directory Structure

After performing the installation, the following directory structure will be installed:
Directory Name 	Purpose
/etc/akiban 	configuration files
/usr/sbin 	any admin binaries/scripts we have
/usr/bin 	any command line tools for users we have
/usr/share/akiban 	all akiban jar files (persistit, server)
/usr/share/doc/akiban 	man pages, license information
/etc/init.d/akiban-server 	startup script for akiban server
/var/lib/akiban 	akiban data files
/var/lib/tomcat6 	tomcat data files
/var/log/akiban 	akiban log files
/var/log/tomcat6 	tomcat log files
/var/run/akiban 	pid files
Akiban Studio URL

To access Akiban Studio, enter the following URL in a web browser:
http://localhost:8080/akiban-studio
Known Issues

Summary of high-level known issues:

    Explicit transactions are not currently supported
    Known issues should be reviewed to determine which ALTER TABLE operations are not currently supported
    Akiban Studio limitations:
        Information is currently not persisted to disk. Any operations that are performed should be saved or deployed prior to exiting Akiban Studio.
        Once a group is deployed, tables may be added to the group, but grouped tables cannot be altered nor can tables be removed from a group without dropping and recreating the group.

Issue 	Description
BIT, BLOB and ENUM/SET datatypes not supported 	Attempting to create or group tables with BIT, BLOB or ENUM/SET datatypes will return an error
YEAR(2) as index may return incorrect results 	See this MySQL Bug report (http://bugs.mysql.com/bug.php?id=49478) for more details
Troubleshooting
Port conflicts

In some cases, one of the default ports assigned to an Akiban process will already be assigned to a running process. The easiest way to identify the conflict, and to identify the free ports on a system is to run the netstat command:
netstat --tcp --listening --programs

Then refer to the Akiban documentation on configuration options to adjust the ports used by Akiban processes.
Existing Tomcat installation

Akiban Studio can be installed in an existing Tomcat deployment, but in most cases you will prefer to keep it separate. See the Tomcat documentation
Tomcat Crashed!

See the Tomcat documentation
Resources

We will be uploading product documentation to http://www.akiban.com soon!
Until then, if you have any questions or feedback for us, please don't hesitate to email support@akiban.com.